#summary List of changes since first release
#labels Featured

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

----
= !MacroLua =

== v1.12, 2/18/2011 ==
=== New feature: ===
 * Support for scripting analog controls
   * Currently only works for FBA-rr

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * Removed unwanted case sensitivity if macro symbol was written lowercase in the module.
 * Running multiple ROMs in a single Lua session now correctly rechecks the module each time.
 * Multiple consecutive state operations won't cause parse error.
 * Autogenerated modules will work for 2-way joysticks.

=== Enhancements ===
 * new console module: `psxjin`
 * new arcade modules: `forgottn`, `pzloop2` (both macro and input)
 * The format of `macro-modules.lua` has been changed slightly to accomodate analog and to make it more readable.

=== Documentation: ===
 * Added instructions for analog scripting
 * Added emu status row for new emulator, psxjin 2.0 svn619
 * Added emu status column for new analog feature
   * Not applicable to most emus
 * Updated status of new emulator versions (from r93):
   * gens11 svn296: no changes
   * vba 23.4a: no changes
   * pcejin svn177: lua+user input now works but still no emu alias


== v1.11, 11/5/2010 ==

=== Changes regarding input display: (FBA/MAME only) ===
 * Control over input display has been integrated into the new input-display.lua and is now removed from !MacroLua.
   * It's still toggled with Lua hotkey 5.
 * input-display.lua is rerun when starting a new game to ensure the display is correct.
 * It no longer causes a crash if input-display.lua or input-modules.lua cannot be found.
 * input-display.lua and input-modules.lua are being put back in the !MacroLua archive until FBA-rr and MAME-rr get updated with the new versions.

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * Numbered buttons were not working while using generic modules. (FBA/MAME only)

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Added modules for `ringdest` and `megaman`/`megaman2`
 * The incremental wait can be used in parentheses to multiply the effect, but you still only get one.
 * When you stop playback in incremental wait mode, the current wait is printed to the console for reference.
 * Removed the warning when a script loads a state without luasav data in MAME-rr.
   * Scripts seem to work fine when the data is not there.
   * Bulletproof playback & recording is still disabled for MAME though.
 * Savestate operations can be put at the end of the script, without a frame advance, and will work.
   * But MAME-rr does the save a few frames too early, so put a few blank frames after the last input.
 * New warnings triggered for:
   * redundant key press or hold
   * hold or release symbol followed by invalid game key
   * current module contains reserved characters
   * invalid `longwait`, `longpress`, or `longline` values (no longer causes crash)
   * designated script file cannot be found (no longer causes crash)

=== Documentation: ===
 * Relaxed MAME-rr warnings.
 * New emulators tested:
   * snes9x 1.52 `r185` (doesn't work)
   * VBA23.2-Win32 (doesn't work; stick with [http://code.google.com/p/vba-rerecording/downloads/detail?name=vba-rerecording-svn225-win32.zip svn225])

== v1.10, 9/12/2010 ==

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Dumping to text file in frame-by-frame format is no longer invoked with a hotkey. Instead, it will be done if the script has an uncommented `???` written in it when played. This was done to free up a hotkey and to ensure that dump files don't get created accidentally.
 * Loop mode has been changed to reparse the whole script rather than repeating the contents of the initial read. This allows the user to edit and save the macro while it's playing and observe the changes without reentering the play command.

=== New features: ===
 * Incremental wait mode. If a wait command in the script is followed by a `?`, the script will be played in a special loop mode in which the specified wait value is incremented after each iteration. (For example, `W20?` waits for 20 frames and increases that by one after each try.) This is a more efficient way of finding the optimal wait period for a setup.
   * Unlike loop mode, the script does not get reread between iterations.
   * There can only be one point in the script with an incremental wait. Only the first is used if multiple points are present.
 * The hotkey that used to activate text dump mode has a new function: If in incremental wait mode, pressing this key causes the wait value to cycle between increasing, decreasing, and holding steady. Otherwise, this key toggles between loop mode and normal mode.
   * Loop mode is no longer invoked with `###`.
   * If active, autopause will pause between iterations of loop mode or incremental wait.

Only one of the three special modes can be active at once. The priority from highest to lowest is:
|| *Special mode* || *activate by:* ||
|| text dump mode || writing "`???`" ||
|| incremental wait mode || writing "`W`(number)`?`" ||
|| standard loop mode || toggle loop hotkey ||

== v1.09, 9/10/2010 ==

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Trying to load a missing macro file results in a warning and not a crash.
 * In MAME-rr, loading a state that wasn't saved while the script was running caused a crash. This is changed to a warning with instructions.
 * Turning pause after playback on and off is now handled by a Lua hotkey (if available) or a predefined hotkey instead of a setting in the options file.
 * Turning input display on and off is now handled by a Lua hotkey instead of a setting in the options file. !MacroLua will throw a warning instead of crashing if the input display script can't be loaded. This only applies to FBA/MAME.
 * The input display scripts have been removed from the package because they are now included with both FBA-rr and MAME-rr.
 * The options in `macro-options.lua` are organized better.

=== Documentation: ===
 * Tested the latest versions of the supported emulators. (None of them improve !MacroLua support.)

== v1.08, 8/9/2010 ==

=== New features: ===
 * Support for MAME-rr, but read the comments in documentation.
 * If used with an FBA/MAME game that has no known module, one is generated automatically.
 * Looping mode repeats the script indefinitely. Invoke by writing "###" in the .mis file.

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Better method of designating modules in FBA/MAME that checks the ROM name.
 * When recording input in FBA/MAME, .mis files are automatically named after the ROM.

=== Documentation: ===
 * FBA-rr now supports Lua+user input, Lua hotkeys, & bulletproof savestates
   * Minimum required version of FBA-rr is now 0.0.5

== v1.07, 6/13/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * Frame-by-frame output no longer has doubled linebreaks.
 * Both `CRLF` and `LF` linebreaks are correctly parsed now.
 * It no longer causes problems to put a numerical key press directly after a state operation.

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Parsing warnings are now reported by line number in addition to frame number.
 * There's a warning if a valid key is pressed without a frame advance at the end of a script.
 * Key release commands at the end of a script are processed normally without a frame advance.

=== Documentation: ===
 * Savestates seem to work fine in the new FCEUX 2.1.4a.

== v1.06, 5/29/2010 ==

=== New feature: ===
 * You may write `F` (forward) or `B` (back) in scripts and these are equivalent to `L` or `R` depending on the active player.

== v1.05, 5/21/2010 ==

=== New feature: ===
 * You can convert the playback file to one-line-per-frame format, like FM2 format and the "input stream" readout in !AutoMacro.<br>This is activated by hotkey `numpad-` by default.

== v1.04, 5/11/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * Included the updated `input-display.lua`, which was left out of 1.03.

== v1.03, 5/11/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * Thanks to a discovery by !FatRatKnight, implemented hotkey while paused for FCEUX, PCSX, & FBA.

== v1.02, 5/6/2010 ==

=== Enhancement: ===
 * User can disable `longwait`, `longpress`, and `longline` features by setting these values to 0.

=== Documentation: ===
 * added explanation table for the config options
 * improved the emu compatibility table

== v1.01, 5/5/2010 ==

=== Enhancement: ===
 * frameMAME compatibility option
   * This lets the user choose whether the parser should ignore frameMAME audio commands in the script or treat them as ordinary commands

== (v1.0) 4/13/2010 ==

=== Initial public release ===

----
= !AutoMacro =

== v1.06, 11/6/2010 ==

=== New feature: ===
 * Implemented loop mode: toggle with checkbox, hotkey or menuitem.

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Warning given if keymap symbol is a reserved character or more than a single character.
 * Number of script/settings warnings is displayed after load.
 * `framemame` compatibility mode will never be needed and has been removed.

== v1.05, 6/13/2010 ==

=== Enhancements: ===
 * Parsing warnings are now reported by line number in addition to frame number.
 * There's a warning if a valid key is pressed without a frame advance at the end of a script.

== v1.04, 5/29/2010 ==

=== New feature: ===
 * You may write `F` (forward) or `B` (back) in scripts and these are equivalent to `L` or `R` depending on the active player.

== v1.03, 5/7/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * cannot bind `F10`, `F11`, `F12` or `PGUP`

=== Enhancement: ===
 * reduced file update check interval from 5 sec to 1 sec. (checks only occur while idle.)

== v1.02, 5/7/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * cannot send anymore and must restart if the target window loses focus

== v1.01, 5/5/2010 ==

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * `macrofile` setting not applied
 * crash if `nplayers` or `nkeys` exceed defaults
 * crash if script contains no commands
 * "Unloading script" message even when no script is loaded

=== Enhancement: ===
 * frameMAME compatibility option

== v1.0, 5/4/2010 ==

=== Initial public release ===

----
= !TranScripter =

== v1.01 7/20/2010 ==

=== Enhancement: ===
 * added support for yabause-rr, but YMV can still only do 1 player

=== Problems fixed: ===
 * error checking bugs
 * bad keymaps

=== Documentation: ===
 * won't support Linux-only systems for med-rr unless someone requests otherwise

== v1.0, 7/17/2010 ==

=== Initial release ===
 * for mednafen-rr only